---
layout: post
title:  "Intro to Website Planning"
date:   2015-07-28
category: design
permalink: planning-a-website
---


It is critical that you spend a fair amount of time planning before you begin designing or developing a website. Always remember that well designed software is not about the latest trends in design or technology. Great software starts with people.

It is our job, as designers and developers, to cater to the end user. We can create successful software by understanding what users need and giving it to them in the clearest, least cluttered way possible. It is in the best interest of our users, our software, and our careers to conduct user research.

Conducting research gives us the information neccessary to satisfy the needs and desires of the users. Gathering this data helps us develop new perspectives and allows us to understand the motives and behaviors of users seeking a better solution.

The easiest way to conduct user research is to observe users as they test your software, or even a competitor's software. The aim is to watch someone else use your product, and note the difficulties or inefficiencies they encounter. We can then take that insight and alter our product to satisfy the users. Observation is the easiest way to gather feedback from your target audience.

It is imperative that you keep an accurate account of what happens during observations, so video or audio recordings are preferred. Always be watching for hesitations and struggles during observation, as these moments give us insight into areas that we can improve. Identifying troublesome aspects of competitor's products can also help you differentiate your product and offer features that others don't.

While observation helps us note the difficulties users encounter as they use a product, user interviews help us understand exactly what people want. After defining your target audience, ask them about their experience with your product.

Avoid closed questions and leading questions. Closed questions can be answered with a simple yes or no, and do not stimulate productive dialog between the user and the researcher. Leading questions tend to be directional, closing off potentially indesirable answers. You want to ask open ended questions that lead to thoughtful discussions about the user's experience and what they felt or thought as they used the product. The aim is to generate insights by urging the participants to share the unique aspects of their experience.

As you gather data through observation and interviews, you may begin to notice behavioral and demographic patterns amongst your users. You can use these patterns to define the core demographic who will make up your user base. Creating profiles, otherwise known as personas, for each type of user will help you focus on creating a product that solves problems unique to each type of user.

Gathering 2-3 personas should be sufficient if your product targets a specific audience. This handful of user profiles can be powerful enough to allow you to make informed decisions about potential features for your product and can help you prioritize their implementation by allowing you to cater to a specific persona.

After we have observed, interviewed, and created personas for our users, we can begin to form scenarios that will mimic the ways users will interact with our software to accomplish their goals. These scenarios are called user stories, they help us design our products in the context of a user's day to day life.

User stories are used to describe how and why the user will interact with a particular facet of a product. Whether it's ordering pizza from a mobile app, using an interactive kiosk in a mall, or posting an update to a social network, crafting user stories helps us discover the various ways our product can be used and the issues users can encounter.

Upon observing, interviewing, creating personas, and crafting hypothetical stories about the ways that our software will be used, we have gathered enough data to move on to the next step of the design process: finding inspiration!

This article, Intro to Website Planning, is the first of a series on website planning. Stay tuned for additional posts elaborating on user observation, interviews, personas, and stories.
